@c Local settings

@set localgitrepo file:///usr/local/data/cs318/pintos.git
@set gitrepo https://github.com/jhu-cs318/pintos.git
@set localpintoshttppath https://cs.jhu.edu/~huang/cs318/fall19/pintos.tar.gz
@set localpintosbindir /usr/local/data/cs318/x86_64/bin
@set pintossetupguide https://cs.jhu.edu/~huang/cs318/fall20/project/setup.html
@set pintosdoxygenurl https://jhu-cs318.github.io/pintos-doxygen/html/index.html
@set pintostestscorepercent 60
@set pintosdesignscorepercent 40

@set recommendvnc
@set recommendgit
@clear recommendcygwin
@clear recommendcvs

@macro localmachines{}
The CS 318 ``officially supported'' Pintos development machines are 
those in the @uref{https://support.cs.jhu.edu/wiki/Linux_Clients_on_the_CS_Undergrad_Net, ,ugrad} 
and @uref{https://support.cs.jhu.edu/wiki/Linux_Clients_on_the_CS_Grad/Research_Net, , grad} 
lab machines in the JHU CS department.
@end macro

@macro localpathsetup{}
Under the @command{bash} login shell, you can do so
with this command:
@example
export PATH=@value{localpintosbindir}:$PATH
@end example
@noindent
It is a good idea to add this line to the @file{.bash_profile} or @file{.bashrc} file
in your home directory. Otherwise, you'll have to type it every time
you log in. The ugrad lab machines in the CS department use @command{tcsh} login 
shell by default (typing @command{echo $SHELL} will tell), the syntax for setting 
PATH is a bit different. You need to add this line to the @file{.tcshrc} with
this command:
@example
set path = (/usr/local/data/cs318/x86_64/bin $path)
@end example
@end macro

@macro localcrossbuild{}
@end macro

@macro localhonorcodepolicy{}
In the context of JHU CS 318 course, please respect the spirit
and the letter of the honor code by refraining from reading any homework
solutions available online or elsewhere.  Reading the source code for
other operating system kernels, such as Linux or FreeBSD, is allowed,
but do not copy code from them literally.  Please cite the code that
inspired your own in your design documentation.
@end macro

@macro localcredits{}
@c none needed
@end macro

@macro localcvspolicy{}
Instead, we recommend integrating your team's changes early and often,
using a source code control system such as Git (@pxref{Git}).
This is less likely to produce surprises, because everyone can see
everyone else's code as it is written, instead of just when it is
finished.  These systems also make it possible to review changes and,
when a change introduces a bug, drop back to working versions of code.
@end macro

@macro localcodingstandards{}
@c If appropriate, describe additional local coding standards here.
@end macro

@macro localdevelopmenttools{}
@c Descriptions of additional, local development tools can be inserted here
@end macro
